© 2021 JETIR August 2021, Volume 8, Issue 8

www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162)

A Literary Study on Ritucharya - A Complete
Regimen of Life
Dr. Deepika Mehra1, Dr. Shekhar Patel2, Dr. Sujit Kumar3

1. Assist Professor, Department of Kriya Sharir, Vijyashree Ayurvedic medical college, Jabalpur, MP.
2. Community Health officer, Shaskiya Ayurvedic Ausadhalaya, Pindrai, Jabalpur, MP.
3. Assist. Prof., Department of Kriya Sharir, Vivek College of Ayurvedic Sciences & Hospital, Bijnor, Uttar
Pradesh.
4. Corresponding Author – Dr. Deepika Mehra, Assist. Professor, Kriya Sharir Department, Vijyashree
Ayurvedic medical college, Jabalpur, MP.

ABSTRACT

People and state are two sides of the same coin, and they are both confusing, intricate, and interconnected.
The disturbing impact of the Tridosha balance in the body is triggered by the annual change in seasons.
The non-recognition of Ritucharya (an explicit six-season regimen) leads to increased lopsidedness of
doshas and a variety of illnesses. In varying amounts, the body has three types of Doshas (Vata, Pitta, and
Kapha) and three types of Gunas (Satvika, Rajsika, and Tamsika). These segments are vital and have a
significant impact on one's behavior, as well as one's preferences and dislikes, the type of skin we have, the
food we eat, the absorption process, the body's adaptation to various circumstances and seasons, the type of
sickness that is likely to attack our type of body, and so on.
Keywords: Ritucharya, Doshas, Tridosha, Guna, etc.

Introduction
The body that we were given by the creator is a unique, significant, but also delicate gift. This is influenced
by a variety of factors, including the environment in which it lives, the people it interacts with, diet
acceptability, what it thinks and believes, and so on. Furthermore, changing seasons have an affect on our
bodies.1 According to Ayurveda, there are six seasons (Ritus) in a year, and the body must adjust to be
healthy, fit, and free of illness, as seen by the daily variations. In varying amounts, the body has three types
of Doshas (Vata, Pitta, and Kapha) and three types of Gunas (Satvik, Rajsik, and Tamsik). These segments
are significant and have a significant impact on one's behaviour, as well as one's liking and disliking, the
type of skin we have, the food we eat, the absorption process, the body's adaptation to various
circumstances and seasons, and the type of illness that is likely to attack our type of body.2
The Concept of Ayurveda3
Having a full study is like having a daily hotline for individuals to learn about their body type and function
in the same way, avoiding unnecessary medical issues. It can also be described as an art of solid living
because it gives us complete awareness of our bodies and allows us to know what kind of food we should
JETIR2108597

Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org

e876

© 2021 JETIR August 2021, Volume 8, Issue 8

www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162)

consume at what time, what kind of way of life we should seek, the proper preparation of sleep and
relaxation, the proper attitude of dozing, things we should stop doing in order to reduce the risk factor
associated with our well-being, and so on. And that's all it takes to keep the body's hormones in check.
Even today, we're squandering a lot of our hard-earned money on drugs and chronic medical diseases, as
well as on extremely little concerns like acid reflux, internal tension, and restlessness, which, if not
properly addressed, might escalate into major problems. 4

Method and Material:
Various periodicals, Ayurvedic and Contemporary Text Books, Authoritative Websites, Reputable
Newspapers, Authoritative Literatures, Manuscripts, Sanskrit Dictionary, and other sources of Ritucharya
information were used.
What is the importance of Ritucharya5

Charya denotes follow-up or order, while Ritu signifies season. In basic terms, Ritucharya refers to daily
activity, a style of life, and a food that should be complemented with a certain periodic requirement in
order to maintain hormonal balance in our bodies and to be healthy and powerful. Based on the position of
the sun, Ayurveda divides the year into two Kaals: 6
a.

Aadaan Kaal (Uttarayan)

b.

Visarga Kaal (Dakshinayaan).

The sun and wind are incredible during Uttarayan, obliterating the earth's unique quality and cooling
properties. The sun's output is released throughout Dakshinayaan, the moon becomes even stronger, and
mists, downpours, and chilly breezes restore the world's coolness. 7 In addition, the Uttrayan Kaal is shaped
by the summer, spring, and cold seasons, and the Dakshinayaan Kaal is shaped by the rainy, fall, and
winter seasons. These two kaals have a comparable effect on the Doshas in our anatomy in the
surroundings of our anatomy. 8, 9

Table 1: Seasonal regimen
Ritu

10-16

Hemant

Indications regarding diet and lifestyle

Contraindication

Dairy and its preparations, cane juice and its preparations,

Avoid foods and beverages that

grains such as black lentil (Phaseolus radiates), marshy

vitiate vata, such as laghu (light)

animal flesh, unctuous, acidic, salty food items, lipids, butter,

and ruksha (dry), as well as strong

and tepid water for drinking

winds.

Use of aguru lepa (Aquilaria agallocha), abhayanga (oil
massage), and jentaka sweda as part of a healthy lifestyle (hot
sweating). Carry damp, heavy clothes.
Shishira

JETIR2108597

Regimen as advised in Hemant ritu

Pungent, bitter and vata

Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org

e877

© 2021 JETIR August 2021, Volume 8, Issue 8

www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162)
provoking food and drinks

Vasanta

Yava is a meal that is easy to digest (Hordeum vulgare).

It is best to avoid sleeping

Godhuma (Tritium vulgare), a newcomer to the diet.

throughout the day and eating the

Shashaka's Flesh (the rabbit). It is advised to drink water that

common madhura rasa meal.

has been boiled with shunthi (zingiber officinale), vijayasara
(Pterocarpus marsupium), or mustak (Cyperus rotandus).
Udvartana (massage) with chandana (Santalum album), Kesara
(Crocus sativus), Kavala (gargle), Dhoompana (smoking with
medicinal medicines), anjana (collyrium), and vamana
andnasya are also recommended.
Grishma

Madhura (sweet), sheeta (cold), and snigdha (unctuous) foods

Avoid amla (sour), katu (pungt),

and drinks are suggested, as are leaf mantha and jaggery, as

and ushana in your diet and

well as ghee and milk with Sali rice.

alcohol (warm). Excessive exercise

It is suggested that you stay in calm locations, apply

and sexual activity overindulgence

sandalwood polish, decorate with flowers, and wear light

would be prohibited.

clothes.
Varsha

Along with meat from desert animals and vegetables, they

Mantha and open water sources

consume old yava (Hordeum vulgare), godhuma (Triticum

Excessive activity and river

aestivum), and salt rice (Oryza sativa). Dietary ingredients

bathing should be avoided.

such as amla, lavana, and snigdha are advised. When cooking
meals, it is suggested that you use honey.
Sharad

In a diet, sweet, spicy, salty, and bitter foods and beverages

Evitate marine and marshland

are recommended. Yava, Godhuma is a good choice for you.

species' curd and flesh.

Treatments such as Virechana (purgation) and Raktamokshana

Stop working in the sun, and don't

(bloodletting) are advised.

bother sleeping creatures in the
afternoon.

Hemant Ritucharya:
Milk and its preparations, stick juice and its preparations, grains such as black lentil (Phaseolus transmits),
mucosal tissue, unctuous, acrid, salty meal, fat, oil, and warm drinking water 25

Sisira Ritucharya:
Hemant Ritu Pungt's regimen includes nasties and vata-stimulating foods and beverages.
Vasanta Ritucharya:26
Feed that is easily absorbed Yava (Hordeum vulgare). Godhuma (Tritium vulgare), a nectar used in the
feeding regimen. Material from the Shashaka (hare). It is advised to drink water that has been boiled with
shunthi (zingiber officinale), vijayasara (Pterocarpus marsupium), or mustak (Cyperus rotandus). Advised
It is best to avoid sleeping in the morning and consuming Madhura rasa-dominant nutrition.
Recommended Panchakarma Therapies:
Vamana, Nasya, Dhoompan, Steam bath along with Abhyanga.
JETIR2108597

Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org

e878

© 2021 JETIR August 2021, Volume 8, Issue 8

www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162)

Grishma Ritucharya:
Madhura (sweet), Sheeta (cold), and snigdha (unctuous) nutrition and drink are recommended, as is manta
leaf alongside Jaggery, and ghee and milk alongside Sali grains. Keeping cool, using sandalwood powder,
accessorising with flowers, and wearing light outfits It is suggested that you avoid Amla (sharp), Katu
(impactful), and Ushana (warm) in your diet, as well as booze. Unnecessary training and excessive physical
activity should be avoided at all costs. 27

a. Food:

Take flour combined with cold water and sugar after soaking in cold water to make a nice, light (easy to
digest), fatty, cold and hot dish. During this period, the consumption of madya (wine) is strictly banned. If
wine is consumed in large doses, it can cause inflammatory effects, leaving the body frail and sluggish,
increasing the burning sensation, and causing delirium. If wine is consumed in small doses or mixed with
more water, it can cause inflammatory effects, leaving the body frail and sluggish, increasing the burning
sensation, and causing delirium. In the summer, boiling white rice (like full moon) may be eaten with
Moong daal khichadi, green vegetables like cucumber, Tinday, and Pumpkin, and other easily digestible
mineral-rich meals. Soups, juices, nuts, dried fruits, and other vitamin and mineral-rich drinks must be
taken. 28

Night regimen:
At night, one should sleep in a pleasant room with a cool environment, but this does not mean that one
should stay in the air conditioning because it is dangerous to one's health. Sexual behaviors should be
avoided, and individuals should dress in extremely light and soft clothing so that they can relax and sleep
soundly. 29

Recommended herbs need to be taken during this period:
Haldi and Neem.

Varsha Ritucharya:
The Agni (digestive activity) is low during the rainy season. It has already been reduced by the summer; it
deteriorates more and is vitiated by the Doshas. The effect of dense clouds full of water, cold winds with
snow, contaminated water owing to heat, warmth of the soil, and sourness aggravates the Doshas. The
Doshas are starting to vitiate and produce various illnesses as a result of the weak digestive activity30. It's
also a good idea to follow all of the basic guidelines for reducing Dosha imbalances and improving
digestion. Treatments such as Panchakarma and Asthapana Basti (decoction enema therapy) will be
recommended. Old grains can be utilized to make milk, spiced meat juice, pulse soup, wine made from
grapes, fermented decoctions, and mastu (whey, thin water, or curds) that has been treated with additional
Sochal salt and Panchakola flour. Water that has been boiled and filtered may usually be consumed. On
JETIR2108597

Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org

e879

© 2021 JETIR August 2021, Volume 8, Issue 8

www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162)

cloudy days, the meal will be bitter, salty, and unctuous, as well as warm, honeyed, and easily digested.
People should not walk (only use automobiles), use fragrances, expose their garments to scented smoke,
and reside on the top levels of buildings, away from the sun, cold, and snow.31

Avoid:
Rain tea, coffee prepared with maize flour and ghee, sleeping all day, romantic indulgence, exercise, and
sun exposure are all recommended.

Sharad Ritucharya:
The guy is used to the rainy season's chill. Pitta, which had grown during Varsha (rainy season), is
significantly worsened when he is abruptly exposed to the warm rays of the Sun (autumn). Purgatory
therapy, Mokshana (bloodletting), and Tikta ghrita (medicated ghee recipe given in the treatment of Kustha
chapter 19 of Chikitsa Sthana) should be utilized to address this. People who are hungry should take salty,
sweet, astringent, and easily digested foods like maize, sugar, Amla, Patola, honey, and meat from desertlike animals. The significance of this season is that, like Vansant, it is the period of Ritusandhi, when the
weather improves. It is becoming increasingly necessary for our bodies to embrace new norms. As a result,
the Hindu Navratras and even the Muslim Ramzan fall within this period, and fasting is no longer
required.32 The medical rationale is that the body need cleansing and cleaning during this period. The
temperature is already rising as the fire component rises, which leads to an increase in Pitta. Virechana is
used to eliminate old Pitta from the body that has collected over the course of the year (Panchakarma
Therapy). Snehana is also used to counteract the rise in Pitta. That's why so many individuals are now
suffering with Gall Bladder Stones, which are caused by excessive Pitta processing. Hyperacidity, nausea,
bloating, indigestion, and constipation are other common issues. Herbal treatments and Panchakarma
therapies are particularly essential in each of these areas for full detoxification and body cleansing. 33
CONCLUSION
One of the cornerstones to a healthy lifestyle is having a good routine. In reality, regardless of the
unpredictability of everyday life, the human way of life should be supervised. Standard varieties have a
great impact on the body and, when used in accordance with the fundamental principles dictated by the
seasons, tend to enhance vulnerability. Such elements will go a long way toward resolving the way of life
issue. Aside from the standard medical treatment, the non-pharmacological components of disease
resistance should also be pushed to the patient. In any instance, understanding continuity is necessary for
the success of this strategy. This technical assessment will set the path for future research.
Conflict of Interest – None
Source of Finance –Nil
REFERENCES
1. Pappachan JM, Chacko EC, Arunagirinathan G, Sriraman R. Management of hypertensiom and diabetes
JETIR2108597

Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org

e880

© 2021 JETIR August 2021, Volume 8, Issue 8

www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162)

in obesity: Non- Pharmacological Measures. 2011 March 22: International Journal of hypertension.
Doi: 104061/2011/3098065
2. Tripathi Ravidutt, Ashtanga Sangraha of Vagbhata, Saroj hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 3rd chapter,
Dincharya- adhyaya, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2003. p. 36.
3. Tripathi Ravidutt, Ashtanga Sangraha of Vagbhata, saroj hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 3rd chapter,
Dincharya- adhyaya, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2003. p. 37-9.
4. Tripathi Ravidutt, Ashtanga Sangraha of Vagbhata, saroj hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 3rd chapter,
Dincharya- adhyaya, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2003. p. 41
5. Tripathi Ravidutt, Ashtanga Sangraha of Vagbhata, saroj hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 3rd chapter,
Dincharya- adhyaya, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2003. p. 42
6. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 1st chapter Matrashitiya-adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 130
7. Tripathi Ravidutt, Ashtanga Sangraha of Vagbhata, saroj hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 3rd chapter,
Dincharya- adhyaya, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2003. p. 60
8. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 6th chapter Tasyasheetiya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 130
9. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 6th chapter Tasyasheetiya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 137
10. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 6th chapter Tasyasheetiya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 140
11. Tripathi Ravidutt, Ashtanga Sangraha of Vagbhata, saroj hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 4th chapter,
Ritucharya- adhyaya, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2003. p. 70
12. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 6th chapter Tasyasheetiya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 141
13. Tripathi Ravidutt, Ashtanga Sangraha of Vagbhata, saroj hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 4th chapter,
Ritucharya- adhyaya, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2003. p. 70
14. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
JETIR2108597

Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org

e881

© 2021 JETIR August 2021, Volume 8, Issue 8

www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162)

Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 6th chapter Tasyasheetiya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 142
15. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 6th chapter Tasyasheetiya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 143
16. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 6th chapter Tasyasheetiya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 145
17. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 8th chapter Indryeupkramniya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati
Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 181.
18. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 8th chapter Indryeupkramniya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati
Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 182.
19. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 8th chapter Indryeupkramniya - adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati
Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 183-7
20. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Chikitsa sthana 1st chapter Abhyakamlakiya Rasayanpada, Chaukhambha Bharati
Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 5
21. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Nidana Sthana 6th chapter Shosha-adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 653
22. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Vimana Sthana 1st chapter Rasvimana-adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p.680
23. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Vimana Sthana 1st chapter Rasvimana-adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p.683
24. Mercola, Studies show eating more slowly benefits your health.

Available

from

http://articles.mercola.com/sites/articles/archive/2014/03/14/ chewing-food.aspx, Last accessed 2016,
December 06.
25. Shastri Ambikadutt, Susruta Samhita edited with Ayurveda tatva sandipika Hindi Commentary, Sutra
JETIR2108597

Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org

e882

© 2021 JETIR August 2021, Volume 8, Issue 8

www.jetir.org (ISSN-2349-5162)

Sthana 46th chapter, Anapanavidhi-adhayay, Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint
edition; 2007. p. 222
26. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 7th chapter Navegandharniya- adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati
Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 161
27. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Sutra Sthana 20th chapter Maharoga -adhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati Sansthan,
Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 405
28. Shastri Ambikadutt, Susruta Samhita edited with Ayurveda tatva sandipika Hindi Commentary, Sutra
Sthana 24th chapter,

Anagatabadhapratishedham-adhayay,

Chaukhambha

Sanskrit

Sansthan,

Varanasi, reprint edition; 2007. p. 107
29. Kour B (2017) Ritucharya- Ayurvedic Way To Cope Up With The Seasonal Effect On Our Body. Int J
Complement Alt Med 5(1): 00140. Doi: 10.15406/Ijcam.2017.05.00140.
30. Neha Lamba. Non-pharmacological Ayurveda approach for prevention of life style disorders: A review.
Int. Res. J. Pharm. 2017;8(3):1-4 http://dx.doi.org/10.7897/2230-8407.080325
31. Shastri Kashinath & Gorakhnath Chaturvedi, Charaka Samhita of Agnivesha elaborated Vidyotini
Hindi commentary, Chikitsa sthana 6th chapter Prameha Chikitsadhyay, Chaukhambha Bharati
Sansthan, Varanasi, reprint edition; 2005. p. 227
32. Tiwari Sushma, Gehlot Sangeeta and Tiwari SK, Effect of exercise on physiological variations as per
Prakriti in healthy individuals and certain diseased conditions, Ph.D Thesis;2011
33. Shastri Ambikadutt, Susruta Samhita edited with Ayurveda tatva sandipika Hindi Commentary, Sutra
Sthana 24th chapter, Anagatabadhapratishedham-adhayay, Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, Varanasi,
reprint edition; 2007. p. 107

JETIR2108597

Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org

e883

